sData testing
	D:\PraiseTheLord\HSBGInfotech\DataTesting

SQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Module 1	Module 1: Introduction to RDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------

RDBMS (Relational Database Management System)
	Type of database system 
	Stores and manages data 
		in a structured and organized way. 
	Follows the relational model
		emphasizes relationships between different pieces of data. 

Key concepts of RDBMS:

	Tables: 
		Data is stored in tables
		Each table represents a specific entity 
			(e.g., customers, products, orders).
	Rows and Columns: 
		Tables consist of 
			rows (records) 
		and 
			columns (attributes). 
		Each row represents a single instance of the entity 
			(e.g., a specific customer record). 
		Columns define the characteristics of that entity 
			(e.g., customer name, address, email).
	Keys: 
		Each table has a 
			primary key, 
				a unique identifier for each record. 
				eliminates duplicate data entries. 
				e.g. empId in emp table 
			foreign keys 
				reference primary keys in other tables
				establishing relationships between them.
				e.g. deptId in emp table 
	Relationships: 
		Tables are not isolated data silos. 
		RDBMS allows you to define relationships between tables. 
		This enables you to efficiently retrieve and manipulate data 
			across multiple tables based on these connections.
	
	SQL (Structured Query Language): 
		Standard language for interacting with relational databases. 
		Allows you to perform various operations like 
			query data
			insert new records
			updat existing data
			delet data.
	
Benefits of RDBMS:
	Structured Data Organization: 
		Data is organized in a clear and well-defined manner
			easier to 
				understand, 
				manage, and 
				query.
	Data Integrity: 
		ACID properties 
			ensure 
				data consistency and 
				accuracy.
	Data Relationships: 
		Ability to define relationships between 
			tables 
				simplifies complex data retrieval and manipulation.
	SQL Support: 
		SQL 
			widely used and 
			standardized language for 
				querying and 
				managing data.
	Scalability: 
		RDBMS can scale to accommodate 
			large datasets and 
			high volumes 
				of transactions.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Master/slave architecture 
	Primary/secondary/territiary deployment
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Examples of Popular RDBMS:
	MySQL
	Oracle Database
	Microsoft SQL Server
	PostgreSQL

---------------------------------------------------------------------

	Definition and Purpose of RDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------


RDBMS: Definition and Purpose
RDBMS stands for Relational Database Management System. 
	Specific type of database 
		designed to 
			store and 
			manage 
				data in a structured and organized way
		following a set of principles called the relational model.

Definition:

	Relational: 
		Data is organized into related tables, 
		allow connections and comparisons 
			between different data points.
	Database Management System (DBMS): 
		Software that interacts with the database
			allow users to 
				create, 
				access, and 
				manipulate the data.
Purpose:

	Efficient Data Storage and Retrieval:
		Data is organized into tables with well-defined structures, making it easy to find and retrieve specific information.
	Relationships between tables 
		enable you to query and analyze data across multiple tables efficiently.
Data Integrity:
	RDBMS enforces data consistency through features like primary keys (unique identifiers) and data types, minimizing errors and ensuring data accuracy.
	ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) guarantee data integrity during transactions, preventing data loss or corruption.
Scalability and Manageability:
	RDBMS can handle large datasets and high volumes of transactions, making it suitable for complex applications.
	Structured data organization simplifies data management and maintenance.
Standardized Access:
	SQL (Structured Query Language) is the standard language for interacting with RDBMS. This allows for easier data manipulation and querying across different software systems that support SQL.
	In simpler terms, an RDBMS is like a well-organized filing cabinet for your data. It keeps everything categorized, connected, and easy to find, ensuring the information you store remains reliable and useful.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Evolution and History of RDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The story of RDBMS goes back to the early 1970s, evolving from the need for a more efficient and organized way to manage data. Here's a glimpse into its history:

1. The Dawn of the Relational Model (1970):

Edgar F. Codd, a computer scientist at IBM, published a paper titled "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Banks." This paper laid the foundation for the relational model, outlining the core principles of data organization in tables with rows and columns, and establishing relationships between them.
2. Prototype Development (1970s):

Two key projects emerged:
System R at IBM: Developed by IBM as a research project to create a prototype RDBMS. This eventually led to the development of DB2, a prominent commercial RDBMS.
INGRES at University of California, Berkeley: Initially an academic project, it later became a commercially available RDBMS.
3. The Rise of Commercial RDBMS (1970s - 1980s):

The 1970s saw the birth of the first commercial RDBMS, Oracle, released in 1979 by Relational Software (now Oracle Corporation). This was followed by other notable players like Ingres, DB2, SAP Sybase ASE, and Informix.
During this period, RDBMS gained significant traction due to its advantages in data organization, management, and querying capabilities compared to earlier hierarchical and network database models.
4. Standardization and SQL (1980s - 1990s):

The 1980s witnessed the standardization of SQL (Structured Query Language) by organizations like ISO (International Organization for Standardization) and ANSI (American National Standards Institute). This standardized language for interacting with relational databases became crucial for developers and users.
RDBMS matured significantly during this era, with advancements in features like indexing for efficient data retrieval, table joins for combining data from multiple tables, and transaction management for data consistency.
5. The Internet Age and Beyond (1990s - Present):

With the rise of the internet, RDBMS continued to be a dominant force due to its scalability and ability to handle large datasets.
Cloud-based RDBMS solutions emerged, offering flexible deployment options and easier data management.
While NoSQL (Not Only SQL) databases gained popularity for specific use cases with unstructured or big data, RDBMS remains a cornerstone for many applications due to its structured data organization and strong data integrity features.
The evolution of RDBMS continues with ongoing advancements in areas like security, performance optimization, and integration with cloud technologies. While new database models emerge, RDBMS is likely to stay relevant for years to come, thanks to its robust foundation and versatility in managing a wide range of data needs.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	ACID properties
---------------------------------------------------------------------

ACID stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. These are four key properties that guarantee the reliability and consistency of transactions in a database management system (DBMS), particularly RDBMS (Relational Database Management System).

Let's break down each property and its significance:

Atomicity:

Ensures that a transaction is treated as a single unit.
Either all changes within the transaction succeed, or none do.
This prevents partial updates to the database, maintaining data integrity.
Imagine transferring money between two accounts. Atomicity ensures either both accounts are updated successfully (money transferred), or neither is affected (no transfer occurs).
Consistency:

Guarantees that a transaction maintains the data according to pre-defined rules (constraints).
These rules can involve data types, relationships between tables, or specific business logic.
Consistency ensures the data remains in a valid state after a transaction.
For example, a transaction updating customer information might enforce a rule that all emails must have a valid format (e.g., [email address removed]).
Isolation:

Ensures that concurrent transactions are isolated from each other, preventing conflicts and maintaining data integrity.
When multiple transactions access or modify the same data simultaneously, isolation guarantees that each transaction sees a consistent view of the data and doesn't interfere with others.
Imagine two users updating the same product quantity at the same time. Isolation ensures each update happens independently, avoiding conflicts that could lead to incorrect inventory levels.
Durability:

Guarantees that once a transaction is committed (finalized), the changes are permanently saved to the database.
Even in case of system failures (e.g., power outages), the database ensures the committed transactions persist.
Durability protects against data loss and ensures the database reflects the latest updates even after a restart.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Comparison with other Database Models (Hierarchical, Network)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
RDBMS vs. Hierarchical and Network Database Models
While RDBMS (Relational Database Management System) dominates the data storage landscape, other database models like hierarchical and network models existed before and still have niche applications. Here's a comparison to understand their strengths and weaknesses:

RDBMS:

Structure: Data is organized in tables with rows and columns. Relationships between tables are defined through keys (primary and foreign).
Strengths:
Structured and organized data simplifies retrieval and management.
Relationships between tables enable powerful data analysis across different data points.
ACID properties ensure data integrity and consistency.
Standardized access through SQL makes it versatile for various applications.
Weaknesses:
Less flexible for highly specialized data structures (e.g., semi-structured data).
Complex queries involving multiple joins can impact performance for very large datasets.
Hierarchical Model:

Structure: Data is organized in a tree-like structure, with a single parent node at the top and child nodes branching out below. Each child node can have only one parent.
Strengths:
Efficient for representing one-to-many relationships (e.g., file systems, organizational charts).
Simple data navigation within the hierarchy.
Weaknesses:
Limited flexibility for representing complex relationships beyond one-to-many hierarchies.
Difficult to establish relationships between data in different parts of the hierarchy.
Not suitable for large datasets or complex queries.
Network Model:

Structure: Data is organized in a more flexible network structure, allowing records (entities) to have multiple parent nodes. Relationships are established using pointers between records.
Strengths:
More flexible than hierarchical models for representing complex many-to-many relationships.
Efficient for specific use cases like computer aided design (CAD) data.
Weaknesses:
Data complexity can increase with numerous relationships, making it challenging to manage and navigate.
Querying data across different record types can be cumbersome.
Not as widely used or supported compared to RDBMS.
Choosing the Right Model:

The best database model depends on the specific needs of your application and data structure:

RDBMS: Ideal for structured data with complex relationships, data integrity needs, and requirement for standard SQL access.
Hierarchical Model: Well-suited for one-to-many relationships and applications like file systems or organizational structures.
Network Model: Useful for complex many-to-many relationships, but less common due to its complexity compared to RDBMS.
In conclusion, RDBMS offers a balance of structure, flexibility, and data integrity, making it a popular choice. However, understanding hierarchical and network models provides context for their specific use cases and historical significance in data management
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 2	Module 2: Features of RDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	ACID Properties
---------------------------------------------------------------------
already covered
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Data Integrity
---------------------------------------------------------------------
already covered - but talk about nosql 
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Data Consistency
---------------------------------------------------------------------
already covered - but talk about nosql 

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Scalability
---------------------------------------------------------------------


Scalability in RDBMS (Relational Database Management Systems)
Scalability is a crucial aspect of RDBMS, referring to its ability to handle increasing amounts of data, user requests, and overall workload.  Here's a breakdown of scalability in RDBMS:

Challenges to Scalability:

As RDBMS usage grows, it can face challenges like:

Performance Bottlenecks: Processing large datasets or complex queries can strain hardware resources, leading to slow response times.
Storage Capacity Limits: As data volume increases, the existing storage might not be sufficient to accommodate the growing needs.
Concurrency Issues: With more users accessing the database simultaneously, managing concurrent transactions and maintaining data integrity becomes more complex.
Approaches to Scaling RDBMS:

RDBMS offers two main approaches to address scalability challenges:

Vertical Scaling (Scale-Up):
Focuses on increasing the capacity of the existing hardware resources.
Methods include:
Upgrading the CPU (Central Processing Unit) to a more powerful model.
Adding more RAM (Random Access Memory) to improve processing speed.
Upgrading storage capacity with additional hard drives or transitioning to Solid State Drives (SSDs) for faster data access.
Horizontal Scaling (Scale-Out):
Involves adding more servers (nodes) to distribute the workload across multiple machines.
Common techniques include:
Sharding: Dividing the database into smaller, self-contained units (shards) based on a specific key (e.g., user ID, product category). Each shard resides on a separate server, distributing the load.
Replication: Creating copies of the entire database or specific tables on multiple servers. This improves read performance by allowing queries to be executed on any replica server.
Choosing the Right Approach:

The choice between vertical and horizontal scaling depends on several factors:

Cost: Vertical scaling might be initially cheaper, but costs increase significantly as hardware reaches its limits. Horizontal scaling offers more cost-effective scaling by adding commodity hardware.
Complexity: Vertical scaling is simpler to implement, while horizontal scaling involves managing multiple servers and data distribution, increasing complexity.
Data Model and Access Patterns: Certain data models and access patterns might benefit more from one approach over the other.
Additional Considerations for Scalability:

Database Optimization: Techniques like proper indexing, query optimization, and denormalization can improve RDBMS performance and scalability.
Database Monitoring: Continuously monitoring performance metrics and resource utilization helps identify bottlenecks and plan scaling strategies proactively.
Choosing the Right RDBMS: Some RDBMS solutions are inherently more scalable than others. Consider database options that offer built-in features for sharding, replication, and other scaling functionalities.
By understanding the limitations and employing appropriate scaling techniques, RDBMS can be a viable solution for managing large datasets and high volumes of transactions in various applications. However, in some scenarios involving massive datasets or unstructured data, NoSQL databases might offer better scalability options.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Security
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Security in RDBMS (Relational Database Management Systems)
Securing your RDBMS is critical to protect sensitive information and maintain data integrity. Here's an overview of essential security measures for RDBMS:

1. Access Control:

Authentication: Verify the identity of users attempting to access the database. This typically involves usernames, passwords, or other forms of credentials.
Authorization: Define user permissions based on their roles. Grant access to specific data, functionalities (read, write, update, delete), and tables based on the user's needs (principle of least privilege).
2. User Account Management:

Strong Password Policies: Enforce complex password requirements, regular password changes, and avoid password reuse.
Account Lockouts: Implement mechanisms to lock accounts after a certain number of failed login attempts to prevent brute-force attacks.
Disable Unused Accounts: Regularly review and disable unused accounts to minimize potential attack surfaces.
3. Data Encryption:

Encrypt data at rest: Store sensitive data in an encrypted format within the database to protect it even if unauthorized users gain access to the storage.
Encrypt data in transit: Use secure protocols like TLS (Transport Layer Security) to encrypt data transmission between applications and the database server, preventing interception during network traffic.
4. Database Activity Monitoring:

Track user activity: Monitor database access logs to identify suspicious activity, unauthorized access attempts, or unusual queries.
Alerting: Set up alerts for anomalies or potential security breaches based on specific activity patterns.
5. Database Hardening:

Minimize attack surface: Disable unnecessary services and functionalities on the database server to reduce potential vulnerabilities.
Keep software updated: Regularly apply security patches and updates to the database software to address known vulnerabilities.
Network Security: Implement firewalls and network segmentation to restrict access to the database server from unauthorized network segments.
6. Backups and Disaster Recovery:

Regular Backups: Create periodic backups of your database to a secure location. This allows restoring data in case of accidental deletion, corruption, or security incidents.
Disaster Recovery Plan: Develop a plan for recovering from potential disasters like hardware failures, natural disasters, or cyberattacks. This plan should outline procedures for restoring data from backups and resuming database operations.
Additional Security Considerations:

Database Encryption Keys: Securely manage database encryption keys. Consider hardware security modules (HSMs) for additional key protection.
Data Masking and Anonymization: For sensitive data that needs to be accessed for development or testing purposes, consider data masking or anonymization techniques to minimize exposure of real data.
Regular Security Audits: Conduct periodic security audits to identify vulnerabilities and ensure the effectiveness of security measures.
By implementing these security practices along with best practices for user management and data handling, you can significantly strengthen your RDBMS security posture and protect your valuable data assets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Codd's rules 
---------------------------------------------------------------------


Codd's rules, also known as Codd's twelve rules, are a set of thirteen guidelines proposed by Edgar F. Codd in 1970 to define a true relational database management system (RDBMS). These rules establish a foundation for ensuring data integrity, consistency, and efficient data manipulation within a relational database.

Here's a breakdown of the core principles outlined in Codd's rules:

Data Representation and Access (Rules 1-3):

The Information Rule: All data in the database must be represented logically in tables with rows and columns. This ensures a structured and organized approach to data storage.
The Guaranteed Access Rule: Every individual data element (value) within a table must be logically accessible using a combination of table name, primary key (unique identifier for a row), and attribute name (column name). No other methods, like pointers, should be used for data access.
Systematic Treatment of NULL Values: Null values represent missing or unknown data. Codd's rules emphasize a consistent way to handle null values to avoid ambiguity and ensure data integrity.
Data Independence and Integrity (Rules 4-10):

Active Online Catalog: The structure of the entire database, including table definitions, data types, constraints, and relationships, must be stored in an online catalog (data dictionary) accessible by authorized users. This allows for efficient management and reduces reliance on external documentation.

The Comprehensive Data Sublanguage Rule: There should be a single language capable of defining the entire database schema (structure), data manipulation (insertion, update, deletion), and data retrieval (queries). This language, typically SQL (Structured Query Language) in most RDBMS, promotes consistency and simplifies data management.

View Updating Rule: If a view (a virtual table based on a logical query of underlying tables) can be retrieved from the database, it should also be logically updatable using the same language. This ensures data consistency between the view and the base tables.

High-level Insert, Update, and Delete: Data manipulation (insert, update, delete) operations should be achievable using the high-level data sublanguage (usually SQL) without resorting to low-level implementation details. This simplifies data management and reduces errors.

Physical Data Independence:  The physical storage and access methods of the database should be independent of the logical structure (tables, relationships). This allows for changes to the physical storage layout without impacting the way users interact with the data through the data sublanguage (SQL).

Logical Data Independence:  Changes to the logical structure of the database (e.g., adding/removing tables, modifying relationships) should not require modifications to application programs that interact with the data using the data sublanguage (SQL). This promotes data flexibility and simplifies application maintenance.

Integrity Independence:  Data integrity constraints (rules that govern data validity) should be definable in the relational data model and stored in the data catalog, independent of the application programs that use the data. This centralizes data integrity rules and simplifies enforcement.

Distribution and Subversion (Rules 11-13):

Distribution Independence: The ability to distribute the database physically across multiple locations or servers should be transparent to users and applications. The data sublanguage (SQL) should handle distribution without requiring modifications.
Non-Subversion Rule: There should be no way to bypass the relational data sublanguage (SQL) to access or manipulate the database. This ensures all data manipulation adheres to the defined rules and maintains data integrity.
While some argue there are thirteen rules, the core principles lie within the first twelve.  These rules provide a framework for building robust and reliable relational database systems.  Although not all RDBMS implementations strictly adhere to every rule, understanding these principles gives you a strong foundation for working with relational databases and ensuring data quality and consistency.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 3	Module 3: Introduction to SQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Install mysql 
	Windows
		https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/windows-installation.html
	Mac
		https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/macos-installation.html
	Linux
		https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/linux-installation.html
		
		Yum linux
			https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/linux-installation-yum-repo.html
				https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/linux-installation.html
			sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm 
			sudo dnf install mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm -y
			sudo dnf install mysql-community-server -y
			dnf clean packages
		

		
		
	Get ubuntu 20.04 machine 		
		https://docs.rackspace.com/docs/install-mysql-server-on-the-ubuntu-operating-system
			UPDATE mysql.user SET authentication_string = PASSWORD('mypwd') WHERE User = 'root';

	For 22.04
			UPDATE mysql.user SET authentication_string = PASSWORD('mypwd') WHERE User = 'root'; did not work.
			Instead used 	ALTER USER 'root'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'new_password';
			

	sudo mysql --defaults-file=/etc/mysql/debian.cnf

What is SQL?

SQL is a standardized language specifically designed to interact with relational databases.  It allows you to create, manipulate, and retrieve data stored in tables within a relational database management system (RDBMS) like MySQL, Oracle Database, Microsoft SQL Server, or PostgreSQL.

Why is SQL important?

Widely Used: SQL is the standard language for relational databases, making it a valuable skill for anyone working with data.
Data Management and Analysis: SQL empowers you to efficiently create, insert, update, delete, and query data within relational databases.
Data Retrieval: SQL provides powerful tools for retrieving specific data based on various criteria, enabling you to generate reports, analyze trends, and gain insights from your data.
Integration with Applications: Many applications interact with databases using SQL, making SQL knowledge beneficial for developers and data analysts.
Basic SQL Commands:

Here's a glimpse into some fundamental SQL commands to get you started:

SELECT: This command is used to retrieve data from one or more tables. You can specify the columns (attributes) you want to retrieve and filter the results using WHERE clauses.
INSERT: This command allows you to insert new rows of data into a table. You specify the table name and the values for each column in the new row.
UPDATE: This command is used to modify existing data in a table. You can update specific columns based on a WHERE clause to target the rows you want to modify.
DELETE: This command removes rows from a table. Similar to UPDATE, you can use a WHERE clause to delete specific rows based on criteria.
CREATE TABLE: This command allows you to create new tables within the database, defining the structure with column names and data types.
Learning Resources:

Here are some resources to help you delve deeper into SQL:

Online Tutorials: Websites like W3Schools, Khan Academy, and Codecademy offer interactive tutorials and exercises to learn SQL basics.
Video Courses: Platforms like Coursera, edX, and Udemy provide comprehensive video courses on SQL for beginners and advanced users.
Interactive Platforms: Websites like SQL Fiddle and DB Fiddle allow you to practice writing and executing SQL queries in an online environment.
By understanding the basics of SQL and practicing with these resources, you can gain valuable skills for working with relational databases and unlocking the power of your data.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Definition and Purpose of SQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------

SQL: Definition and Purpose
SQL stands for Structured Query Language. It's a standardized language specifically designed to interact with relational databases. Here's a breakdown of its definition and purpose:

Definition:

Structured: SQL queries follow a defined structure, making them easy to understand and write.
Query Language: It allows you to retrieve (query) data, manipulate data (insert, update, delete), and manage the structure of a relational database.
Purpose:

Data Manipulation: SQL empowers you to create, insert, update, and delete data within relational database tables.
Data Retrieval: It provides powerful tools for querying data based on specific criteria. You can filter, sort, join tables, and retrieve the exact information you need.
Database Management: SQL allows you to create new tables, define their structure (columns and data types), and modify the database schema as needed.
Data Analysis: By efficiently retrieving and manipulating data, SQL enables you to analyze trends, generate reports, and gain insights from your data.
Standardized Access: SQL is a widely used and standardized language. This allows different applications and tools to interact with various relational databases seamlessly.
In essence, SQL acts as a bridge between you and the data stored within a relational database. It provides a structured and user-friendly way to interact with your data, making it a crucial skill for:

Database Administrators (DBAs): Managing and maintaining the database infrastructure.
Data Analysts: Extracting and analyzing data for insights and decision making.
Software Developers: Building applications that interact with databases.
Anyone Working with Data: Gaining control over data retrieval and manipulation tasks.
By understanding SQL, you unlock the potential of your relational databases, transforming them from static data repositories into powerful tools for information discovery and analysis.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Evolution and History of SQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The story of SQL (Structured Query Language) is intertwined with the development of relational databases. Here's a glimpse into its evolution and history:

Early Days (1970s):

The Birth of the Relational Model: In 1970, Edgar F. Codd, a computer scientist at IBM, published a paper titled "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Banks." This paper laid the foundation for the relational model, outlining the core principles for organizing data in tables with rows and columns.
Development of System R: Following Codd's relational model, IBM researchers embarked on a project called System R. This project aimed to create a prototype relational database management system (RDBMS) and included the development of a query language for interacting with the database.
Standardization and Rise of Commercial RDBMS (1970s - 1980s):

SEQUEL (Structured English Query Language): The early version of SQL, known as SEQUEL, emerged from the System R project. It was designed to be a user-friendly way to interact with relational databases.
Standardization Efforts: As the use of relational databases grew, the need for a standardized query language became apparent. In the 1980s, organizations like ANSI (American National Standards Institute) and ISO (International Organization for Standardization) played a key role in formalizing and standardizing SQL.
Rise of Commercial RDBMS: The 1970s and 1980s witnessed the birth of several commercial RDBMS solutions like Oracle, DB2 (derived from System R), Microsoft SQL Server, and MySQL. These systems adopted and implemented the evolving SQL standard.
Maturity and Continued Development (1990s - Present):

Wide Adoption and Advancements: With standardization and the increasing popularity of RDBMS, SQL became the dominant language for interacting with relational databases.
Enhancements and Features: Over time, SQL has undergone various revisions and extensions to incorporate new features like stored procedures, triggers, functions, and support for complex data types.
Object-Relational Features: Some RDBMS vendors introduced object-relational features that extended SQL syntax to handle object-oriented concepts within a relational framework.
Integration with New Technologies: Today, SQL continues to evolve, integrating with cloud-based databases and big data technologies.
The Future of SQL:

While NoSQL databases offer alternatives for specific use cases, SQL remains a mainstay for relational databases. Its standardized nature, versatility, and strong foundation for data management ensure its continued relevance.
Advancements in areas like cloud integration, security, and integration with big data ecosystems can further expand the reach and capabilities of SQL.
By understanding the evolution of SQL, you gain a deeper appreciation for its role in data management and its potential for future advancements.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	SQL Standards
---------------------------------------------------------------------
SQL standards are a set of formally defined guidelines that govern the syntax and functionality of the Structured Query Language (SQL) used for interacting with relational databases. These standards ensure consistency and compatibility across different relational database management systems (RDBMS) from various vendors.

Here's a breakdown of the key aspects of SQL standards:

Importance of Standards:

Compatibility: Standardized SQL allows applications written for one RDBMS to work (with some adjustments) on another RDBMS that adheres to the same standard. This promotes portability and reduces development complexity.
Vendor Independence: Developers are not limited to specific RDBMS vendors as they can leverage their SQL skills across different compliant systems.
Clear Communication: Standardized SQL syntax facilitates better communication and collaboration between database administrators, developers, and data analysts working with different relational database environments.
Main Organizations Behind SQL Standards:

American National Standards Institute (ANSI): A US-based organization that played a crucial role in standardizing SQL in the 1980s. The current standard is ANSI X3.135, which is also known as ISO/IEC 9075.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO): An international body that collaborates with national standards institutions like ANSI. ISO/IEC 9075 is the international counterpart to the ANSI SQL standard.
The SQL Standard (ISO/IEC 9075):

This standard, also referred to as SQL-92 (referring to the year of its initial publication), defines the core functionalities of SQL, including:
Data Definition Language (DDL) commands for creating, altering, and dropping database objects like tables, views, and indexes.
Data Manipulation Language (DML) commands for inserting, updating, deleting, and retrieving data from tables.
Data Control Language (DCL) commands for managing user access and permissions within the database.
The standard has been revised and updated over time, with new versions like SQL-99, SQL-2003, and SQL-2016 introducing additional features and functionalities.
Benefits of Using Standards-Compliant RDBMS:

Reduced Development Time: Leveraging standardized SQL reduces the need to rewrite code for different databases, saving development time and effort.
Improved Interoperability: Applications can interact with various compliant databases more easily, fostering data exchange and integration.
Enhanced Maintainability: Standardized code is easier to understand, maintain, and modify in the long run.
It's important to note that not all RDBMS implementations adhere strictly to every aspect of the SQL standard.  Some vendors might include proprietary extensions to offer additional functionalities beyond the standard. However, understanding the core SQL standards provides a solid foundation for working with relational databases effectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 4	Module 4 : Basic Terminologies
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Tables
---------------------------------------------------------------------
In SQL, tables are the fundamental building blocks for organizing data within a relational database. They act like spreadsheets with rows and columns, where each row represents a unique record, and each column represents a specific attribute or characteristic of that record.

Here's a closer look at tables in SQL:

Structure:

A table is defined by its name and a set of columns.
Each column has a name, a data type (e.g., integer, string, date), and optional constraints (rules governing the data in that column).
The first column often contains a unique identifier (primary key) for each row, allowing for efficient data retrieval and manipulation.
Data Storage:

Each row in a table represents a single data record.
The values in each column correspond to the specific attributes of that record.
For example, a table named "Customers" might have columns for "customer_id" (primary key), "name," "address," "email," and "phone_number."
Relationships Between Tables:

Although tables store individual records, they can be linked together using relationships.
These relationships are established by referencing columns between tables, allowing you to combine data from multiple tables for comprehensive analysis.
Key Concepts Related to Tables in SQL:

Data Definition Language (DDL): These are SQL commands used to create, alter, and drop tables within the database. The CREATE TABLE statement is fundamental for defining the structure of a table.
Data Manipulation Language (DML): These commands allow you to interact with the data within the tables. This includes inserting new rows (INSERT), updating existing data (UPDATE), deleting rows (DELETE), and retrieving data (SELECT) based on specific criteria.
Primary Key: A column (or a combination of columns) that uniquely identifies each row in a table. It enforces data integrity and prevents duplicate records.
Foreign Key: A column in one table that references the primary key of another table. This establishes a link between related tables, allowing you to join data from different tables.
Benefits of Using Tables in SQL:

Organized Data Storage: Tables provide a structured and well-defined way to store and manage data.
Efficient Data Retrieval: By leveraging the primary key and indexing techniques, SQL enables efficient retrieval of specific data records.
Data Relationships: Tables can be linked to represent complex relationships between different data entities.
Data Integrity: Constraints and data types within tables help maintain data accuracy and consistency.
In essence, tables in SQL serve as the foundation for relational databases. Understanding their structure and how to interact with them using SQL is essential for working effectively with relational data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Rows and Columns
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Within tables, the core data organization structure in SQL, reside two crucial elements: rows and columns. These elements work together to store and manage data efficiently in relational databases.

1. Rows (Records):

Imagine rows like entries in a spreadsheet or individual lines in a table.
Each row represents a single, unique record within the table.
All rows in a table have the same structure, defined by the table's columns.
Each row contains data pertaining to a specific entity or concept that the table represents.
For instance, in a "Customers" table, each row might represent a single customer.
2. Columns (Attributes/Fields):

Columns are like the vertical categories in a spreadsheet or the headings in a table.
Each column represents a specific attribute or characteristic of the entity that the table holds data for.
All rows in a table have corresponding values for each column.
The data type of a column defines the kind of data it can store (e.g., numbers, text, dates).
Columns provide a way to categorize and organize the data within each record.
Example:

Consider a table named "Products" that stores information about products in a store.

product_id (PK)	product_name	price	stock
1001		T-Shirt				25.99	50
1002		Jeans				39.95	30
1003		Coffee Mug			8.50	100
Here, each row represents a single product. The columns define specific attributes of a product, like its name, price, and current stock level.

Key Points to Remember:

The number of rows (records) in a table can vary depending on the data you store.
The number of columns (attributes) is fixed based on the table's structure defined during creation.
The order of rows is not inherently significant in most cases. However, the order of columns defines the sequence of attributes associated with each record.
The primary key (PK) constraint, often a unique identifier column, ensures no duplicate rows exist within a table.
In conclusion, rows and columns in SQL form the backbone of data organization within tables. Understanding their roles is essential for effectively managing and interacting with data in relational databases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Constraints
---------------------------------------------------------------------
In SQL, constraints act like rules that govern the data stored within tables. 
They enforce data integrity and consistency, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of your information in a relational database. 
Here's a breakdown of the different types of constraints commonly used in SQL:

1. Data Type Constraints:

	Define the kind of data a column can hold 
		(e.g., 
			integer (int), 
			string (varchar), 
			date).
	This prevents incompatible data types from being entered, reducing errors and maintaining data consistency.

	Example: Specifying data_type: INTEGER for a column named age ensures only numerical values representing ages are stored.
2. NOT NULL Constraints:
	
	Enforce that a column cannot contain null values (missing or unknown data).
	This ensures all rows have a valid value for that specific column.
	Example: A NOT NULL constraint on the customer_name column guarantees that every customer record has a name filled in.

3. Unique Constraints:

	Guarantee that specific values within a column, or a combination of values across multiple columns, are unique throughout the table.
	This prevents duplicate records and ensures each row has a distinct identity.
	Example: A unique constraint on the email column in a "Customers" table prohibits storing the same email address for multiple customers.
4. Primary Key Constraints:

	A special type of unique constraint that acts as the main identifier for each row in a table.
	A table can only have one primary key, and it must not contain null values.
	The primary key enforces data integrity and allows for efficient data retrieval using indexing techniques.
	Example: The product_id column in a "Products" table can be designated as the primary key, uniquely identifying each product record.
5. Foreign Key Constraints:
	lab: 877
	
	Establish relationships between two tables by referencing a primary key from one table (parent table) in another table (child table).
	This ensures data consistency across linked tables and prevents orphaned records (child records referencing non-existent parent records).
	Example: A foreign key constraint referencing the customer_id (primary key) in the "Orders" table can link orders to specific customers in the "Customers" table.
6. CHECK Constraints:

	Allow you to define a custom expression or condition that must be true for a row to be inserted into the table.
	This provides more granular control over the validity of data beyond basic data types or uniqueness.
	Example: A check constraint on a price column can ensure it's always a positive value (e.g., price > 0).
Benefits of Using Constraints:

	Data Integrity: Constraints help prevent invalid or inconsistent data from entering the database, safeguarding data accuracy.
	Improved Data Quality: By enforcing data type rules, uniqueness, and referential integrity, constraints promote reliable data for analysis and decision-making.
	Reduced Errors: Constraints act as a safety net, minimizing data entry errors and ensuring data consistency across tables.
	In essence, constraints in SQL play a crucial role in maintaining the health and reliability of your relational database. Understanding the different types of constraints and implementing them appropriately is essential for effective data management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Indexes
---------------------------------------------------------------------
In SQL, indexes are special data structures that act like reference guides within a relational database. They significantly improve the performance of data retrieval queries, especially those involving filtering or sorting large datasets.


(continue from here)
Here's how indexes work:

	Imagine a physical book with an index at the back, listing keywords and their corresponding page numbers.
	Similarly, an SQL index is a separate structure that maps specific values in a table column to the actual rows containing those values.
	When you execute a query that filters or sorts data based on the indexed column, the database engine can efficiently locate the relevant rows using the index, instead of scanning the entire table.
Benefits of Using Indexes:

	Faster Query Execution: Indexes significantly speed up queries that involve filtering or sorting data based on the indexed column(s). This is because the database can quickly locate relevant rows using the index rather than examining every row in the table.
	Improved Read Performance: Queries that retrieve data based on indexed columns benefit the most from indexing, leading to faster response times and better overall database performance.
	Efficient WHERE Clauses: Indexes are particularly helpful for queries with WHERE clauses that filter data based on specific column values.
Types of Indexes:

	B-Tree Indexes: The most common type of index in SQL. They organize data in a tree-like structure for efficient searching and retrieval.
	Hash Indexes: Faster for exact value lookups but don't support efficient range-based queries (e.g., finding all values between a specific range).
	Composite Indexes: Indexes can be created on multiple columns together, improving performance for queries that involve filtering or sorting based on combinations of these columns.
When to Use Indexes:

	Frequently Queried Columns: Create indexes on columns that are often used in WHERE clause conditions, joins, or sorting operations within queries.
	Selective Queries: Indexes are most beneficial for queries that filter or sort data, reducing the number of rows the database engine needs to scan.
	Large Tables: For tables with a significant number of rows, indexes can make a substantial performance difference in query execution speed.
Things to Consider with Indexes:

	Overhead: Creating and maintaining indexes consumes storage space and requires additional processing when data is inserted, updated, or deleted.
	Index Selection: Choosing the right columns to index is crucial. Indexing every column might not always be necessary and can negatively impact performance in some cases.
	Monitoring and Maintenance: Review and adjust indexes over time as query patterns and data volumes change.
In conclusion, indexes are valuable tools for optimizing the performance of data retrieval in SQL databases. Understanding how they work and when to use them effectively can significantly enhance the speed and efficiency of your database operations.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Types of Indexes
---------------------------------------------------------------------

already covered
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	How to decide which index to use?
---------------------------------------------------------------------

In SQL, indexes are special data structures that act like reference guides within a relational database. They significantly improve the performance of data retrieval queries, especially those involving filtering or sorting large datasets.

Here's how indexes work:

	Imagine a physical book with an index at the back, listing keywords and their corresponding page numbers.
	Similarly, an SQL index is a separate structure that maps specific values in a table column to the actual rows containing those values.
	When you execute a query that filters or sorts data based on the indexed column, the database engine can efficiently locate the relevant rows using the index, instead of scanning the entire table.
Benefits of Using Indexes:

	Faster Query Execution: Indexes significantly speed up queries that involve filtering or sorting data based on the indexed column(s). This is because the database can quickly locate relevant rows using the index rather than examining every row in the table.
	Improved Read Performance: Queries that retrieve data based on indexed columns benefit the most from indexing, leading to faster response times and better overall database performance.
	Efficient WHERE Clauses: Indexes are particularly helpful for queries with WHERE clauses that filter data based on specific column values.
Types of Indexes:

	B-Tree Indexes: The most common type of index in SQL. They organize data in a tree-like structure for efficient searching and retrieval.
	Hash Indexes: Faster for exact value lookups but don't support efficient range-based queries (e.g., finding all values between a specific range).
	Composite Indexes: Indexes can be created on multiple columns together, improving performance for queries that involve filtering or sorting based on combinations of these columns.
When to Use Indexes:

	Frequently Queried Columns: Create indexes on columns that are often used in WHERE clause conditions, joins, or sorting operations within queries.
	Selective Queries: Indexes are most beneficial for queries that filter or sort data, reducing the number of rows the database engine needs to scan.
	Large Tables: For tables with a significant number of rows, indexes can make a substantial performance difference in query execution speed.
Things to Consider with Indexes:

	Overhead: Creating and maintaining indexes consumes storage space and requires additional processing when data is inserted, updated, or deleted.
	Index Selection: Choosing the right columns to index is crucial. Indexing every column might not always be necessary and can negatively impact performance in some cases.
	Monitoring and Maintenance: Review and adjust indexes over time as query patterns and data volumes change.
In conclusion, indexes are valuable tools for optimizing the performance of data retrieval in SQL databases. Understanding how they work and when to use them effectively can significantly enhance the speed and efficiency of your database operations.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 5	Module 5: PLSQL Data Types
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Numeric Data Types
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Numeric data types in SQL are used to store numerical values within relational database tables. These data types define the format, range, and precision of the numbers your database can handle. Choosing the appropriate numeric data type is essential for efficient data storage, retrieval, and manipulation. Here's a breakdown of some common numeric data types in SQL:

1. Integer Types:

Used to store whole numbers (no decimal points).
Examples: TINYINT, SMALLINT, INTEGER, BIGINT.
These data types differ in the range of whole numbers they can represent.
	TINYINT: Typically used for small integer values, often ranging from -128 to 127.
	SMALLINT: Stores values within a broader range, commonly from -32,768 to 32,767.
	INTEGER: The default integer type in many SQL implementations, offering a wider range (e.g., -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647).
	BIGINT: Can accommodate very large integer values, often ranging from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807.
2. Decimal or NUMERIC Types:

	Designed to store numbers with decimal points, allowing for precise representation of fractional values.
	These data types typically specify two properties:
	Precision: The total number of digits the data type can hold (including both integer and decimal parts).
	Scale: The number of digits allowed to the right of the decimal point.
	Example: DECIMAL(p, s) - Here, 'p' represents the precision and 's' represents the scale. For instance, DECIMAL(5,2) can store values from -999.99 to 999.99.
3. Floating-Point Types:

	Represent real numbers using a scientific notation format.
	Examples: FLOAT, DOUBLE PRECISION (DOUBLE).
	Offer a wider range compared to integer or decimal types but come with inherent limitations in precision due to the way they store numbers internally.
	FLOAT typically provides less precision than DOUBLE PRECISION.
Choosing the Right Numeric Data Type:

Consider the range of values you need to store: Select a data type that can accommodate the minimum and maximum values you expect for your data.
Precision requirements: If you need to store numbers with decimal places, choose DECIMAL or NUMERIC and define appropriate precision and scale.
Storage efficiency: Smaller integer types use less storage space compared to larger types or decimal/floating-point types. If storage space is a concern, consider using the most compact data type that meets your precision needs.
By understanding these common numeric data types and their characteristics, you can effectively store and manage numerical data within your SQL databases. Remember to choose the data type that best suits the range, precision, and storage requirements of your specific data.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Character Data Types
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Character data types in SQL are used to store textual information within relational database tables. These data types define the format, size, and character set limitations for the text you can store. Selecting the appropriate character data type is crucial for efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation of textual data. Here's a breakdown of some common character data types in SQL:

CHAR:
	Fixed-length: Allocates a predetermined number of characters for each value, regardless of the actual data length.
	Padding: If the data entered is less than the defined length, spaces are added to pad the remaining characters and ensure consistency in table structure.
	Example: CHAR(20) can store text up to 20 characters. If you enter "Hello", it will be stored as "Hello " (with 15 spaces).
	VARCHAR:
	Variable-length: Allocates storage space based on the actual length of the data entered, making it more efficient for storing text of varying lengths.
	Maximum length: There's a defined maximum limit for the number of characters a VARCHAR column can hold.
	Example: VARCHAR(50) can store text up to 50 characters. "Hello" would be stored as "Hello" (without any padding).
	TEXT and CLOB:
	Large text objects: Designed to store significantly larger amounts of text data, often used for long descriptions, articles, or unstructured textual content.
	Storage limitations: The exact storage capacity can vary depending on the specific DBMS implementation.
	NCHAR and NVARCHAR:
	Unicode support: These data types are specifically designed to store Unicode characters, which allows you to represent text in various languages with special characters or symbols.
	Similar to CHAR and VARCHAR: They function similarly to their non-Unicode counterparts (CHAR and VARCHAR) but use more storage space per character to accommodate Unicode representation.
Choosing the Right Character Data Type:

	Consider the expected text length: If you know the text will always be a fixed length, CHAR might be suitable. For varying lengths, VARCHAR is more efficient.
	Storage requirements: For very large text content, TEXT or CLOB might be appropriate.
	Global or multilingual needs: If you need to store text in multiple languages with special characters, NCHAR or NVARCHAR would be necessary.
Additional Considerations:

	Character Sets: The character set defines the supported range of characters (e.g., ASCII, UTF-8). Choose a character set that accommodates the languages and symbols you expect to use.
	Collation: Collation dictates how characters are sorted and compared within the database. Consider collation rules if sorting or searching text is a frequent operation.
	By understanding these character data types and their properties, you can effectively manage textual data in your SQL databases. Selecting the right data type ensures efficient storage utilization, avoids unnecessary padding, and allows you to work with text data in a way that aligns with your language and storage requirements.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Date Data Types
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Character data types in SQL are used to store textual information within relational database tables. These data types define the format, size, and character set limitations for the text you can store. Selecting the appropriate character data type is crucial for efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation of textual data. Here's a breakdown of some common character data types in SQL:

CHAR:
	Fixed-length: Allocates a predetermined number of characters for each value, regardless of the actual data length.
	Padding: If the data entered is less than the defined length, spaces are added to pad the remaining characters and ensure consistency in table structure.
	Example: CHAR(20) can store text up to 20 characters. If you enter "Hello", it will be stored as "Hello " (with 15 spaces).
	VARCHAR:
	Variable-length: Allocates storage space based on the actual length of the data entered, making it more efficient for storing text of varying lengths.
	Maximum length: There's a defined maximum limit for the number of characters a VARCHAR column can hold.
	Example: VARCHAR(50) can store text up to 50 characters. "Hello" would be stored as "Hello" (without any padding).
TEXT and CLOB:
	Large text objects: Designed to store significantly larger amounts of text data, often used for long descriptions, articles, or unstructured textual content.
	Storage limitations: The exact storage capacity can vary depending on the specific DBMS implementation.
	NCHAR and NVARCHAR:
	Unicode support: These data types are specifically designed to store Unicode characters, which allows you to represent text in various languages with special characters or symbols.
	Similar to CHAR and VARCHAR: They function similarly to their non-Unicode counterparts (CHAR and VARCHAR) but use more storage space per character to accommodate Unicode representation.
Choosing the Right Character Data Type:

	Consider the expected text length: If you know the text will always be a fixed length, CHAR might be suitable. For varying lengths, VARCHAR is more efficient.
	Storage requirements: For very large text content, TEXT or CLOB might be appropriate.
	Global or multilingual needs: If you need to store text in multiple languages with special characters, NCHAR or NVARCHAR would be necessary.
Additional Considerations:

	Character Sets: The character set defines the supported range of characters (e.g., ASCII, UTF-8). Choose a character set that accommodates the languages and symbols you expect to use.
	Collation: Collation dictates how characters are sorted and compared within the database. Consider collation rules if sorting or searching text is a frequent operation.
	By understanding these character data types and their properties, you can effectively manage textual data in your SQL databases. Selecting the right data type ensures efficient storage utilization, avoids unnecessary padding, and allows you to work with text data in a way that aligns with your language and storage requirements.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Boolean Data Type
---------------------------------------------------------------------

While some SQL implementations might offer a dedicated Boolean data type, it's not universally present across all SQL database systems. Here's a breakdown of how Boolean values are typically handled in SQL:

1. Using BIT Data Type:

	This is the most common approach for representing Boolean values in SQL.
	The BIT data type can store a single binary bit (0 or 1).
	By convention, 0 is considered FALSE and 1 is considered TRUE.
	Example: A table column named is_active can be defined with a BIT data type to indicate whether a record is active (1) or inactive (0).
2. Using Integer Data Types (Less Common):

	In some cases, you might encounter integer data types (like TINYINT) used for Boolean values.
	Similar to the BIT approach, 0 represents FALSE and a non-zero value (often 1) represents TRUE.
	This method is less common but can be found in older database systems or specific implementations.
3. Advantages of BIT Data Type:

	Storage Efficiency: A single bit is the most space-efficient way to store a Boolean value compared to larger data types.
	Standard Interpretation: The convention of 0 for FALSE and 1 for TRUE is widely adopted, making code portability easier between different SQL environments (assuming they also use BIT for Booleans).
4. Limitations to Consider:

	Not Self-Documenting: Looking at the data type alone (BIT) doesn't explicitly tell you it represents Boolean values. Consider using meaningful column names and comments to improve code readability.
	Database-Specific Behavior: While BIT is a common approach, some database systems might have their own way of handling Boolean values. Be mindful of potential differences when working across various SQL platforms.
Overall:

Understanding how Boolean values are represented in SQL, particularly the prevalence of the BIT data type, is essential for effectively working with data that has true/false characteristics. Remember to check your specific database documentation if you encounter any uncertainties regarding Boolean data type handling.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 6	Module 6: Primary Key vs Foreign Key
---------------------------------------------------------------------


Primary keys and foreign keys are both crucial concepts in relational databases that ensure data integrity and establish relationships between tables. Here's a breakdown of their key differences and functionalities:

Primary Key:

	Uniquely identifies each row: A primary key is a column (or a combination of columns) within a table that uniquely identifies each record. No two rows in the table can have the same value for the primary key.
	Enforces data integrity: By ensuring uniqueness, the primary key prevents duplicate entries and maintains data consistency within the table.
	Optimizes data retrieval: Primary keys are often used to create indexes, which significantly speed up data retrieval queries, especially when searching for specific records.
	One table can only have one primary key: There can't be multiple primary keys within a single table.
Foreign Key:

	Establishes links between tables: A foreign key is a column (or a combination of columns) in one table that references the primary key of another table. This creates a link between related data points across different tables.
	Maintains referential integrity: Foreign keys help prevent orphaned records, which occur when a record in one table references a non-existent record in another table.
	Enforces data consistency: By ensuring that foreign key values reference valid primary key values in the referenced table, foreign keys promote data consistency across relational databases.
	A table can have multiple foreign keys: A single table can have multiple foreign keys referencing primary keys from different tables, enabling the creation of complex relationships between data sets.
Here's an analogy to illustrate the difference:

	Imagine a library with two tables: one for Books (with a primary key of ISBN) and another for Borrowers (with a primary key of Borrower ID).
	The Borrowers table might have a foreign key named "ISBN" that references the ISBN (primary key) in the Books table. This establishes a connection between borrowers and the specific books they borrow.
In essence:

	Primary keys act like unique identification tags within a single table.
	Foreign keys act like reference links that connect data across different tables.
	By understanding these concepts, you can effectively design and manage relational databases that maintain data accuracy, consistency, and facilitate efficient retrieval of interconnected information.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Definition and Purpose
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Examples and Use Cases
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 7	Module 7: The Unique Constraint
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The unique constraint in SQL is a database rule that enforces uniqueness within a table. It ensures that specific values, either in a single column or a combination of columns, cannot appear more than once throughout the table. Here's a closer look at how unique constraints work and their benefits:

How Unique Constraints Work:

	You define a unique constraint during table creation or by altering an existing table.
	You specify which column(s) the constraint applies to. This can be a single column or a combination of multiple columns.
	When you try to insert a new row into the table, the database engine checks the values in the designated column(s) against all existing rows.
	If the database encounters a duplicate value (violating the uniqueness), it will raise an error and prevent the row from being inserted, maintaining data integrity.
Benefits of Using Unique Constraints:

	Prevents Duplicate Data: This is the primary function of unique constraints. They ensure each record has a distinct value for the constrained column(s), eliminating redundancy and maintaining data consistency.
	Improved Data Quality: By preventing duplicates, unique constraints promote data accuracy and reliability within your database.
	Enforces Business Rules: You can use unique constraints to implement specific business rules. For instance, you might have a unique constraint on a "customer_email" column to ensure no duplicate email addresses exist in a customer table.
	Indexes and Performance: In some cases, unique constraints can lead to the creation of indexes on the constrained column(s). These indexes can improve the performance of queries that involve filtering or searching based on the unique column(s).
Comparison with Primary Keys:

	Unique constraints share similarities with primary keys, both enforcing uniqueness. However, there are key differences:
	A table can only have one primary key, but it can have multiple unique constraints.
	Primary keys often come with additional constraints, such as NOT NULL, which is not mandatory for unique constraints.
When to Use Unique Constraints:

	You should use unique constraints when you need to ensure uniqueness for a column or a combination of columns, but these columns don't necessarily qualify as the primary identifier for the entire table (the role of the primary key).
	Common use cases include:
	Unique email addresses in a customer table.
	Unique identification numbers for products.
	Combinations of columns that uniquely identify entities (e.g., "customer_id" and "order_number" together for a unique order record).
In conclusion, the unique constraint is a valuable tool for maintaining data integrity and preventing duplicate entries within your SQL tables. Understanding how they work and when to use them effectively can lead to a cleaner, more reliable relational database.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Definition and Purpose
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Differences from Primary and Foreign Key Constraints
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 8	Module 8: DDL Statements
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	CREATE Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	ALTER Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	DROP Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 9	Module 9: DML Statements
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	INSERT Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	UPDATE Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	DELETE Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 10	Module 10: Retrieving Records
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	SELECT Statement
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	WHERE Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	ORDER BY Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	LIMIT Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 11	Module 11: Normalization
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	First Normal Form (1NF)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Second Normal Form (2NF)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Third Normal Form (3NF)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Denormalization
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 12	Module 12: Functions in SQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Aggregate Functions
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Scalar Functions
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Date and Time Functions
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 13	Module 13: Handling Null Values
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	IS NULL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	COALESCE
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	NULLIF
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 14	Module 14: SQL Joins
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	INNER JOIN
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	LEFT JOIN
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	RIGHT JOIN
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	FULL OUTER JOIN
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	CROSS JOIN
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 15	Module 15: Sorting & Grouping
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	ORDER BY Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	GROUP BY Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	HAVING Clause
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 16	Module 16: Stored Procedures, Views & Triggers
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Definition and Purpose
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Syntax and Examples
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Permisssions
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Grant permission
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Revoke permission
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 17	Module 17: Introduction to NoSQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Definition and Purpose
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Evolution and History of NoSQL
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Key-Value Stores, Document Stores, Column Stores, Graph Databases
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 18	Module 18: Types of NoSQL databases
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Key-Value Stores (e.g., Redis)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Document Stores (e.g., MongoDB)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Column Stores (e.g., Cassandra)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Graph Databases (e.g., Neo4j)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 19	Module 19: MongoDB: An introduction
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Overview of MongoDB
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Features and Advantages
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
	Comparison with RDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------




